docs/user/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started with StarryNight

This guide will help you install StarryNight and run your first workflow using the CLI (Command Line Interface) approach. You'll set up the environment and calculate illumination correction functions for Cell Painting images.

!!! info "Implementation Approaches"
    **GUI Approach** (coming soon): Point-and-click interface through Canvas for biologists who prefer visual workflows.

    **CLI Approach** (shown in this guide): Uses direct command-line commands for learning and exploration. It's a simpler way to understand workflow operations step-by-step.

    **Python/Module Approach** (used in production): Most users will execute these operations through Python code (as shown in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`). This approach provides standardized components, containerized execution, and integration with the Canvas UI.

    This guide focuses on the CLI approach as a foundation. See [Practical Integration](../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) for the Python implementation and [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md) for system design details.

## Installation

StarryNight uses the Nix package manager to provide a consistent and reproducible environment:

**Install Nix**:

```sh
# Install Nix
sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon
```

**Clone the Repository**:

```sh
# Clone the repository and navigate to it
git clone https://github.com/broadinstitute/starrynight.git
cd starrynight
```

**Set Up the Environment**:

```sh
# Set up the Nix development environment
nix develop --extra-experimental-features nix-command --extra-experimental-features flakes .
```

**Install Dependencies and Project**:

```sh
# Install basic dependencies
uv sync

# Install the project in editable mode with development tools
uv pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Verify Installation**:

```sh
# Verify the installation
starrynight --help
```

**For Developers**:

If you're developing for StarryNight, the setup process is the same as above. For detailed information on the project architecture and how to extend components, see the [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md).

## Workflow Steps

The following sections guide you through running a basic illumination correction calculation workflow for Cell Painting (CP) images. This process involves downloading sample data, setting up an experiment configuration, generating inventory and index files, and calculating illumination correction functions.

!!! info "Focus of This Guide"
    This guide focuses only on the Cell Painting (CP) track and specifically on the illumination correction calculation step. The [Complete Workflow Example](example-pipeline-cli.md) will add the Sequencing by Synthesis (SBS) (commonly referred to as barcoding) track and show the full analysis workflow.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    Setup["Setup & Preparation"] --> CPIllumCalc["CP Illumination Calculation"]
    style CPIllumCalc stroke:#0066cc
```

## Download Sample Data

StarryNight includes curated test data (FIX-S1) that provides a complete, small-scale dataset for learning the workflow:

```sh
# Create a directory for the sample data
mkdir -p scratch

# Download the FIX-S1 test dataset (36MB)
cd scratch
wget https://github.com/shntnu/starrynight/releases/download/v0.0.1/fix_s1_input.tar.gz

# Verify the download integrity
echo "ddba28e1593986013d10880678d2d7715af8d2ee1cfa11ae7bcea4d50c30f9e0  fix_s1_input.tar.gz" | sha256sum -c

# Extract the data
# Ignore warnings like "tar: Ignoring unknown extended header keyword"
tar -xzf fix_s1_input.tar.gz

# Clean up macOS metadata files
find fix_s1_input -name '._*' -delete
find fix_s1_input -name '.DS_Store' -delete

# Return to project root
cd ..
```

This creates a `fix_s1_input/` directory containing Cell Painting and SBS imaging data from 2 wells with multiple sites and channels.

Before running any commands, set up your data and workspace directories as environment variables:

## Clone CellProfiler plugins github repository

```sh
cd scratch
git clone https://github.com/CellProfiler/CellProfiler-plugins.git

# Return to project root
cd ..

```

## Download and Setup Fiji

Please refer to the Fiji download page [here](https://imagej.net/software/fiji/downloads)

```sh
# Set environment variables for convenience (using absolute paths to avoid path resolution issues)
export DATADIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_input"
export WKDIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace"
export CP_PLUGINS="$(pwd)/scratch/CellProfiler-plugins/active_plugins/"

# Add path to fiji executable. This varies from system to system
export FIJI_PATH=""

# Additional environment variable needed for the complete workflow
export INPUT_WKDIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace"
```

!!! info "Environment Variable Organization"
    The directory structure separates input data from output workspace:

    - `DATADIR`: Points to the downloaded sample data (input)
    - `WKDIR`: Points to your working directory where outputs will be generated
    - `INPUT_WKDIR`: Points to the input workspace folder, within which barcode files are located
    - `CP_PLUGINS`: Points to CellProfiler plugins needed for advanced processing

## Create Experiment Configuration

The experiment configuration file defines parameters for your processing workflow:

```sh
# Create necessary directories for the workflow
mkdir -p scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace/

# Generate a default experiment configuration template
starrynight exp init -e "Pooled CellPainting [Generic]" -o ${WKDIR}
```

!!! info "Available Experiment Configurations"
    StarryNight currently supports these experiment types:

    - `"Pooled CellPainting [Generic]"`: Standard Cell Painting workflow with SBS barcoding
    - `"Pooled CellPainting [Stitchcrop]"`: Cell Painting workflow with image stitching and cropping

    Both configurations use the same underlying experiment model and support the full range of Cell Painting and SBS processing steps. The choice determines which pipeline templates and processing modules are available for your workflow.

This creates an `experiment_init.json` file in your workspace that you can edit to match your dataset's characteristics:

!!! warning "Required Channel Mapping Configuration"
    As of recent updates, StarryNight now requires custom channel mapping configurations in the `experiment_init.json` file. You must include both `cp_custom_channel_map` and `sbs_custom_channel_map` fields that map microscope channel names to semantic biological names.

    Additionally, the `sbs_cell_channel` and `sbs_mito_channel` parameters must be specified even when only working with Cell Painting (CP) data. Include these parameters with the same values as your CP channels.

For the example experiment, the following values can be used.

```json
{
    "barcode_csv_path": ".",
    "use_legacy": false,
    "cp_img_overlap_pct": 10,
    "cp_img_frame_type": "round",
    "cp_acquisition_order": "snake",
    "sbs_img_overlap_pct": 10,
    "sbs_img_frame_type": "round",
    "sbs_acquisition_order": "snake",
    "cp_nuclei_channel": "DAPI",
    "cp_cell_channel": "PhalloAF750",
    "cp_mito_channel": "ZO1AF488",
    "cp_custom_channel_map": {
        "DAPI": "DNA",
        "ZO1AF488": "ZO1",
        "PhalloAF750": "Phalloidin"
    },
    "sbs_nuclei_channel": "DAPI",
    "sbs_cell_channel": "PhalloAF750",
    "sbs_mito_channel": "ZO1AF488",
    "sbs_custom_channel_map": {
        "DAPI": "DNA",
        "A": "A",
        "T": "T",
        "G": "G",
        "C": "C"
    }
}
```

Key parameters explained:

- `cp_img_overlap_pct`: Percentage overlap between adjacent images for stitching (typically 10%)
- `cp_img_frame_type`: Image shape - "round" for circular fields, "square" for rectangular
- `cp_acquisition_order`: Imaging pattern - "snake" for serpentine, "rows" for row-by-row
- `cp_nuclei_channel`, `cp_cell_channel`, `cp_mito_channel`: Channel names for key cellular components
- `cp_custom_channel_map`: Maps microscope channel names (like "DAPI", "PhalloAF750") to semantic biological names (like "DNA", "Phalloidin") used in analysis pipelines
- `sbs_custom_channel_map`: Maps SBS channel names to their biological meanings for barcode analysis
- `use_legacy`: Whether to use pre-tested pipeline templates (recommended: false for new experiments)

Adjust the values to match your experiment setup.

## Generate Inventory

Create a catalog of all image files in your dataset:

```sh
# Generate the inventory
starrynight inventory gen \
    -d ${DATADIR} \
    -o ${WKDIR}/inventory
```

The inventory is a comprehensive catalog of all files in your dataset that:

- Contains basic file information: path, name, extension
- Created by scanning the data directory recursively
- Stored as a Parquet file for efficient querying

This command will create an inventory file:

```
${WKDIR}/inventory/
├── inv/                # Shard directory with temporary files
└── inventory.parquet   # Main inventory file
```

## Generate Index

Parse the inventory to create a structured index with metadata:

```sh
starrynight index gen \
    -i ${WKDIR}/inventory/inventory.parquet \
    -o ${WKDIR}/index/
```

The index is a structured database of metadata extracted from file paths that:

- Contains rich, queryable information: dataset, batch, plate, well, site, channel info
- Is created by parsing file paths using a grammar-based parser
- Enables sophisticated filtering and selection of images
- Is stored as a structured Parquet file

The result will be an `index.parquet` file containing structured metadata for each image. This index will be used in all subsequent processing steps through the `-i` parameter.

!!! info "Path Parsing System"
    StarryNight automatically extracts metadata from file paths using a grammar-based parsing system. The default parser handles the file structure shown in this example, but you can write custom parsers for different organizations. If your data follows a different organization than the pattern used as an example here, you can customize the parser as described in the [Parser Configuration](parser-configuration.md) guide.

!!! note "Expected Parse Errors"
    During index generation, you may see multiple warning messages for files that don't match the expected image path patterns. This is normal and expected behavior:

    ```
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/.DS_Store', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('DOT', '.')
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace/._.DS_Store', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('WORKSPACE', 'workspace')
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace/metadata/Barcodes.csv', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('WORKSPACE', 'workspace')
    ```

    These warnings occur because:

    - Hidden files like `.DS_Store` and `._*` can reappear even after deletion (macOS metadata files)
    - The parser is designed specifically for image files with structured paths
    - Non-image files (CSV, metadata) don't follow the expected naming pattern

    **What this means:** The parser is intentionally strict and only accepts properly formatted Cell Painting (CP) and SBS (Sequencing by Synthesis) image paths. While these warnings may seem numerous, they don't indicate failure - all valid image files are processed correctly and invalid files are safely skipped.

## Create Experiment File

Initialize an experiment using your index and configuration:

```sh
starrynight exp new \
    -i ${WKDIR}/index/index.parquet \
    -e "Pooled CellPainting [Generic]" \
    -c ${WKDIR}/experiment_init.json \
    -o ${WKDIR}
```

This creates an `experiment.json` file with dataset-specific parameters derived from your index.

## Run Illumination Correction Calculation

Let's run the illumination correction calculation, which follows the standard CellProfiler module pattern of generating LoadData files, creating pipeline files, and executing CellProfiler:

First, ensure the directories exist:

```sh
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc/
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc/
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc/
```

!!! info "Pipeline Generation Approaches"
    StarryNight offers two ways to generate CellProfiler pipelines:

    - **Pre-fabricated Pipelines**: Uses established, tested pipeline templates (add `--use_legacy` flag)
    - **Dynamic Generation**: Automatically generates pipelines based on configuration (omit the `--use_legacy` flag)

    This guide uses the pre-fabricated approach for stability.

!!! info "Directory Structure"
    Throughout this guide, we're creating a workspace with this directory structure:

    ```
    ${WKDIR}/
    ├── cellprofiler/                # CellProfiler-related files
    │   ├── loaddata/                # Generated LoadData CSV files
    │   └── cppipe/                  # Pipeline files
    ├── index/                       # Structured metadata
    │   └── index.parquet            # Index file with extracted metadata
    ├── illum/                       # Illumination correction files
    │   ├── cp/                      # Cell Painting illumination
    │   └── sbs/                     # SBS illumination
    └── experiment.json              # Experiment configuration
    ```

    This structure separates inputs, intermediate results, and final outputs, maintaining clear data provenance throughout the workflow.

**Generate LoadData Files:**

```sh
# Generate loaddata files using established pipeline templates
starrynight illum calc loaddata \
    -i ${WKDIR}/index/index.parquet \
    -o ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    --exp_config ${WKDIR}/experiment.json \
    --use_legacy
```

**Generate CellProfiler Pipelines:**

```sh
# Generate CellProfiler pipeline files using established templates
starrynight illum calc cppipe \
    -l ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc/ \
    -o ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    -w ${WKDIR} \
    --use_legacy
```

**Execute CellProfiler Pipelines:**

```sh
# The path must point to a specific .cppipe file, not a directory
starrynight cp \
    -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc/illum_calc_painting.cppipe \
    -l ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    -o ${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc
```

## Verify Results

The illumination correction files will be created in the output directory:

```
${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1
├── Plate1_IllumDNA.npy
├── Plate1_IllumPhalloidin.npy
└── Plate1_IllumZO1.npy
```

You can save the code below as a Python script (e.g., viz_example.py) and run it using uv:

``` sh
uv run viz_example.py
```

```python
# /// script
# dependencies = [
#   "numpy" ,
#   "matplotlib",
# ]
# ///
# Load one of the illumination correction files
import os

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

wkdir = os.environ.get("WKDIR", "./scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace")
data = np.load(f"{wkdir}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1/Plate1_IllumDNA.npy")

# Create a visualization
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
plt.imshow(data, cmap="viridis")
plt.colorbar()
plt.title("DNA Illumination Correction")
plt.savefig(f"{wkdir}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1/Plate1_IllumDNA.png")
plt.show()
```

## Advanced CLI Options

StarryNight commands support additional options to customize processing:

**Path Masking:** Specify a path prefix for resolving file locations using the `-m/--path_mask` option. This sets the base directory path that gets prepended to relative file paths in the generated LoadData CSV files:

```sh
# Set custom path prefix for file resolution
starrynight illum calc loaddata -m "/absolute/path/to/data" ...
```

**Parallel Processing:** Control the number of parallel jobs with the `-j/--jobs` option:

```sh
# Run with 8 parallel jobs (default is 50)
starrynight cp -j 8 -p /path/to/pipeline.cppipe ...
```

**CellProfiler Plugins:** Specify a directory containing CellProfiler plugins:

```sh
starrynight cp -d /path/to/plugins -p /path/to/pipeline.cppipe ...
```

## Next Steps

- Continue to the [Complete Workflow Example](example-pipeline-cli.md)
- Check the [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md) to understand the system structure
- For the Python/Module approach used in production, see [Practical Integration](../architecture/08_practical_integration.md)

!!! info "For Document Contributors"
    This section contains editorial guidelines for maintaining this document. These guidelines are intended for contributors and maintainers, not end users.

    **Purpose and Audience**

    - **Introductory Focus** - This document is a user's first hands-on experience with StarryNight
    - **CLI Emphasis** - Prioritize the CLI approach as an accessible entry point
    - **Single Path with Options** - Present one primary workflow while noting alternatives
    - **Assumed Knowledge** - Users understand basic command line but not StarryNight architecture

    **Structure Principles**

    1. **Clear section headings** - Use H2 headings for main workflow steps without numbers
    2. **Notes for alternatives** - Use MkDocs admonitions to present alternatives without disrupting flow
    3. **Quick start spirit** - Keep explanations brief and focused on practical execution
    4. **Progressive detail** - Start with setup, then basic workflow, then advanced options
    5. **Clear prerequisites** - Ensure directory creation and dependencies are explicitly mentioned

    **Content Style Guidelines**

    6. **Command formatting** - Include descriptive comments in code blocks
    7. **Bold subheadings** - Use bold text rather than deeper heading levels for substeps
    8. **Copy-pastable commands** - Ensure commands work as written without modification
    9. **Environment variables** - Use consistent variables (DATADIR, WKDIR)
    10. **Expected outputs** - Show example outputs and file structures where appropriate

    **Terminology Consistency**

    - "CLI approach" vs "Python/Module approach" - Different ways to use StarryNight
    - "Pre-fabricated pipelines" vs "Dynamic pipeline generation" - Two pipeline generation methods
    - "Workflow" - The end-to-end image processing sequence
    - "Pipeline" - The CellProfiler processing definition
    - "LoadData files" - CSV files that tell CellProfiler which images to process

Commit message:

docs(starrynight): minor fiji related changes

docs/user/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started with StarryNight

This guide will help you install StarryNight and run your first workflow using the CLI (Command Line Interface) approach. You'll set up the environment and calculate illumination correction functions for Cell Painting images.

!!! info "Implementation Approaches"
    **GUI Approach** (coming soon): Point-and-click interface through Canvas for biologists who prefer visual workflows.

    **CLI Approach** (shown in this guide): Uses direct command-line commands for learning and exploration. It's a simpler way to understand workflow operations step-by-step.

    **Python/Module Approach** (used in production): Most users will execute these operations through Python code (as shown in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`). This approach provides standardized components, containerized execution, and integration with the Canvas UI.

    This guide focuses on the CLI approach as a foundation. See [Practical Integration](../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) for the Python implementation and [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md) for system design details.

## Installation

StarryNight uses the Nix package manager to provide a consistent and reproducible environment:

**Install Nix**:

```sh
# Install Nix
sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon
```

**Clone the Repository**:

```sh
# Clone the repository and navigate to it
git clone https://github.com/broadinstitute/starrynight.git
cd starrynight
```

**Set Up the Environment**:

```sh
# Set up the Nix development environment
nix develop --extra-experimental-features nix-command --extra-experimental-features flakes .
```

**Install Dependencies and Project**:

```sh
# Install basic dependencies
uv sync

# Install the project in editable mode with development tools
uv pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Verify Installation**:

```sh
# Verify the installation
starrynight --help
```

**For Developers**:

If you're developing for StarryNight, the setup process is the same as above. For detailed information on the project architecture and how to extend components, see the [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md).

## Workflow Steps

The following sections guide you through running a basic illumination correction calculation workflow for Cell Painting (CP) images. This process involves downloading sample data, setting up an experiment configuration, generating inventory and index files, and calculating illumination correction functions.

!!! info "Focus of This Guide"
    This guide focuses only on the Cell Painting (CP) track and specifically on the illumination correction calculation step. The [Complete Workflow Example](example-pipeline-cli.md) will add the Sequencing by Synthesis (SBS) (commonly referred to as barcoding) track and show the full analysis workflow.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    Setup["Setup & Preparation"] --> CPIllumCalc["CP Illumination Calculation"]
    style CPIllumCalc stroke:#0066cc
```

## Download Sample Data

StarryNight includes curated test data (FIX-S1) that provides a complete, small-scale dataset for learning the workflow:

```sh
# Create a directory for the sample data
mkdir -p scratch

# Download the FIX-S1 test dataset (36MB)
cd scratch
wget https://github.com/shntnu/starrynight/releases/download/v0.0.1/fix_s1_input.tar.gz

# Verify the download integrity
echo "ddba28e1593986013d10880678d2d7715af8d2ee1cfa11ae7bcea4d50c30f9e0  fix_s1_input.tar.gz" | sha256sum -c

# Extract the data
# Ignore warnings like "tar: Ignoring unknown extended header keyword"
tar -xzf fix_s1_input.tar.gz

# Clean up macOS metadata files
find fix_s1_input -name '._*' -delete
find fix_s1_input -name '.DS_Store' -delete

# Return to project root
cd ..
```

This creates a `fix_s1_input/` directory containing Cell Painting and SBS imaging data from 2 wells with multiple sites and channels.

Before running any commands, set up your data and workspace directories as environment variables:

## Clone CellProfiler plugins github repository

```sh
cd scratch
git clone https://github.com/CellProfiler/CellProfiler-plugins.git

# Return to project root
cd ..

```

## Download and Setup Fiji

Please refer to the Fiji download page [here](https://imagej.net/software/fiji/downloads)

## Setup environment variables

```sh
# Set environment variables for convenience (using absolute paths to avoid path resolution issues)
export DATADIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_input"
export WKDIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace"
export CP_PLUGINS="$(pwd)/scratch/CellProfiler-plugins/active_plugins/"

# Add path to fiji executable. This varies from system to system
export FIJI_PATH=""

# Additional environment variable needed for the complete workflow
export INPUT_WKDIR="$(pwd)/scratch/fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace"
```

!!! info "Environment Variable Organization"
    The directory structure separates input data from output workspace:

    - `DATADIR`: Points to the downloaded sample data (input)
    - `WKDIR`: Points to your working directory where outputs will be generated
    - `INPUT_WKDIR`: Points to the input workspace folder, within which barcode files are located
    - `CP_PLUGINS`: Points to CellProfiler plugins needed for advanced processing
    - `FIJI_PATH`: Points to Fiji executable needed for advanced processing

## Create Experiment Configuration

The experiment configuration file defines parameters for your processing workflow:

```sh
# Create necessary directories for the workflow
mkdir -p scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace/

# Generate a default experiment configuration template
starrynight exp init -e "Pooled CellPainting [Generic]" -o ${WKDIR}
```

!!! info "Available Experiment Configurations"
    StarryNight currently supports these experiment types:

    - `"Pooled CellPainting [Generic]"`: Standard Cell Painting workflow with SBS barcoding
    - `"Pooled CellPainting [Stitchcrop]"`: Cell Painting workflow with image stitching and cropping

    Both configurations use the same underlying experiment model and support the full range of Cell Painting and SBS processing steps. The choice determines which pipeline templates and processing modules are available for your workflow.

This creates an `experiment_init.json` file in your workspace that you can edit to match your dataset's characteristics:

!!! warning "Required Channel Mapping Configuration"
    As of recent updates, StarryNight now requires custom channel mapping configurations in the `experiment_init.json` file. You must include both `cp_custom_channel_map` and `sbs_custom_channel_map` fields that map microscope channel names to semantic biological names.

    Additionally, the `sbs_cell_channel` and `sbs_mito_channel` parameters must be specified even when only working with Cell Painting (CP) data. Include these parameters with the same values as your CP channels.

For the example experiment, the following values can be used.

```json
{
    "barcode_csv_path": ".",
    "use_legacy": false,
    "cp_img_overlap_pct": 10,
    "cp_img_frame_type": "round",
    "cp_acquisition_order": "snake",
    "sbs_img_overlap_pct": 10,
    "sbs_img_frame_type": "round",
    "sbs_acquisition_order": "snake",
    "cp_nuclei_channel": "DAPI",
    "cp_cell_channel": "PhalloAF750",
    "cp_mito_channel": "ZO1AF488",
    "cp_custom_channel_map": {
        "DAPI": "DNA",
        "ZO1AF488": "ZO1",
        "PhalloAF750": "Phalloidin"
    },
    "sbs_nuclei_channel": "DAPI",
    "sbs_cell_channel": "PhalloAF750",
    "sbs_mito_channel": "ZO1AF488",
    "sbs_custom_channel_map": {
        "DAPI": "DNA",
        "A": "A",
        "T": "T",
        "G": "G",
        "C": "C"
    }
}
```

Key parameters explained:

- `cp_img_overlap_pct`: Percentage overlap between adjacent images for stitching (typically 10%)
- `cp_img_frame_type`: Image shape - "round" for circular fields, "square" for rectangular
- `cp_acquisition_order`: Imaging pattern - "snake" for serpentine, "rows" for row-by-row
- `cp_nuclei_channel`, `cp_cell_channel`, `cp_mito_channel`: Channel names for key cellular components
- `cp_custom_channel_map`: Maps microscope channel names (like "DAPI", "PhalloAF750") to semantic biological names (like "DNA", "Phalloidin") used in analysis pipelines
- `sbs_custom_channel_map`: Maps SBS channel names to their biological meanings for barcode analysis
- `use_legacy`: Whether to use pre-tested pipeline templates (recommended: false for new experiments)

Adjust the values to match your experiment setup.

## Generate Inventory

Create a catalog of all image files in your dataset:

```sh
# Generate the inventory
starrynight inventory gen \
    -d ${DATADIR} \
    -o ${WKDIR}/inventory
```

The inventory is a comprehensive catalog of all files in your dataset that:

- Contains basic file information: path, name, extension
- Created by scanning the data directory recursively
- Stored as a Parquet file for efficient querying

This command will create an inventory file:

```
${WKDIR}/inventory/
├── inv/                # Shard directory with temporary files
└── inventory.parquet   # Main inventory file
```

## Generate Index

Parse the inventory to create a structured index with metadata:

```sh
starrynight index gen \
    -i ${WKDIR}/inventory/inventory.parquet \
    -o ${WKDIR}/index/
```

The index is a structured database of metadata extracted from file paths that:

- Contains rich, queryable information: dataset, batch, plate, well, site, channel info
- Is created by parsing file paths using a grammar-based parser
- Enables sophisticated filtering and selection of images
- Is stored as a structured Parquet file

The result will be an `index.parquet` file containing structured metadata for each image. This index will be used in all subsequent processing steps through the `-i` parameter.

!!! info "Path Parsing System"
    StarryNight automatically extracts metadata from file paths using a grammar-based parsing system. The default parser handles the file structure shown in this example, but you can write custom parsers for different organizations. If your data follows a different organization than the pattern used as an example here, you can customize the parser as described in the [Parser Configuration](parser-configuration.md) guide.

!!! note "Expected Parse Errors"
    During index generation, you may see multiple warning messages for files that don't match the expected image path patterns. This is normal and expected behavior:

    ```
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/.DS_Store', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('DOT', '.')
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace/._.DS_Store', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('WORKSPACE', 'workspace')
    Unable to parse: {'key': 'fix_s1_input/Source1/workspace/metadata/Barcodes.csv', ...} because of Unexpected token Token('WORKSPACE', 'workspace')
    ```

    These warnings occur because:

    - Hidden files like `.DS_Store` and `._*` can reappear even after deletion (macOS metadata files)
    - The parser is designed specifically for image files with structured paths
    - Non-image files (CSV, metadata) don't follow the expected naming pattern

    **What this means:** The parser is intentionally strict and only accepts properly formatted Cell Painting (CP) and SBS (Sequencing by Synthesis) image paths. While these warnings may seem numerous, they don't indicate failure - all valid image files are processed correctly and invalid files are safely skipped.

## Create Experiment File

Initialize an experiment using your index and configuration:

```sh
starrynight exp new \
    -i ${WKDIR}/index/index.parquet \
    -e "Pooled CellPainting [Generic]" \
    -c ${WKDIR}/experiment_init.json \
    -o ${WKDIR}
```

This creates an `experiment.json` file with dataset-specific parameters derived from your index.

## Run Illumination Correction Calculation

Let's run the illumination correction calculation, which follows the standard CellProfiler module pattern of generating LoadData files, creating pipeline files, and executing CellProfiler:

First, ensure the directories exist:

```sh
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc/
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc/
mkdir -p ${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc/
```

!!! info "Pipeline Generation Approaches"
    StarryNight offers two ways to generate CellProfiler pipelines:

    - **Pre-fabricated Pipelines**: Uses established, tested pipeline templates (add `--use_legacy` flag)
    - **Dynamic Generation**: Automatically generates pipelines based on configuration (omit the `--use_legacy` flag)

    This guide uses the pre-fabricated approach for stability.

!!! info "Directory Structure"
    Throughout this guide, we're creating a workspace with this directory structure:

    ```
    ${WKDIR}/
    ├── cellprofiler/                # CellProfiler-related files
    │   ├── loaddata/                # Generated LoadData CSV files
    │   └── cppipe/                  # Pipeline files
    ├── index/                       # Structured metadata
    │   └── index.parquet            # Index file with extracted metadata
    ├── illum/                       # Illumination correction files
    │   ├── cp/                      # Cell Painting illumination
    │   └── sbs/                     # SBS illumination
    └── experiment.json              # Experiment configuration
    ```

    This structure separates inputs, intermediate results, and final outputs, maintaining clear data provenance throughout the workflow.

**Generate LoadData Files:**

```sh
# Generate loaddata files using established pipeline templates
starrynight illum calc loaddata \
    -i ${WKDIR}/index/index.parquet \
    -o ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    --exp_config ${WKDIR}/experiment.json \
    --use_legacy
```

**Generate CellProfiler Pipelines:**

```sh
# Generate CellProfiler pipeline files using established templates
starrynight illum calc cppipe \
    -l ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc/ \
    -o ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    -w ${WKDIR} \
    --use_legacy
```

**Execute CellProfiler Pipelines:**

```sh
# The path must point to a specific .cppipe file, not a directory
starrynight cp \
    -p ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/cppipe/cp/illum/illum_calc/illum_calc_painting.cppipe \
    -l ${WKDIR}/cellprofiler/loaddata/cp/illum/illum_calc \
    -o ${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc
```

## Verify Results

The illumination correction files will be created in the output directory:

```
${WKDIR}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1
├── Plate1_IllumDNA.npy
├── Plate1_IllumPhalloidin.npy
└── Plate1_IllumZO1.npy
```

You can save the code below as a Python script (e.g., viz_example.py) and run it using uv:

``` sh
uv run viz_example.py
```

```python
# /// script
# dependencies = [
#   "numpy" ,
#   "matplotlib",
# ]
# ///
# Load one of the illumination correction files
import os

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

wkdir = os.environ.get("WKDIR", "./scratch/fix_s1_output/workspace")
data = np.load(f"{wkdir}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1/Plate1_IllumDNA.npy")

# Create a visualization
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
plt.imshow(data, cmap="viridis")
plt.colorbar()
plt.title("DNA Illumination Correction")
plt.savefig(f"{wkdir}/illum/cp/illum_calc/Batch1-Plate1/Plate1_IllumDNA.png")
plt.show()
```

## Advanced CLI Options

StarryNight commands support additional options to customize processing:

**Path Masking:** Specify a path prefix for resolving file locations using the `-m/--path_mask` option. This sets the base directory path that gets prepended to relative file paths in the generated LoadData CSV files:

```sh
# Set custom path prefix for file resolution
starrynight illum calc loaddata -m "/absolute/path/to/data" ...
```

**Parallel Processing:** Control the number of parallel jobs with the `-j/--jobs` option:

```sh
# Run with 8 parallel jobs (default is 50)
starrynight cp -j 8 -p /path/to/pipeline.cppipe ...
```

**CellProfiler Plugins:** Specify a directory containing CellProfiler plugins:

```sh
starrynight cp -d /path/to/plugins -p /path/to/pipeline.cppipe ...
```

## Next Steps

- Continue to the [Complete Workflow Example](example-pipeline-cli.md)
- Check the [Architecture Overview](../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md) to understand the system structure
- For the Python/Module approach used in production, see [Practical Integration](../architecture/08_practical_integration.md)

!!! info "For Document Contributors"
    This section contains editorial guidelines for maintaining this document. These guidelines are intended for contributors and maintainers, not end users.

    **Purpose and Audience**

    - **Introductory Focus** - This document is a user's first hands-on experience with StarryNight
    - **CLI Emphasis** - Prioritize the CLI approach as an accessible entry point
    - **Single Path with Options** - Present one primary workflow while noting alternatives
    - **Assumed Knowledge** - Users understand basic command line but not StarryNight architecture

    **Structure Principles**

    1. **Clear section headings** - Use H2 headings for main workflow steps without numbers
    2. **Notes for alternatives** - Use MkDocs admonitions to present alternatives without disrupting flow
    3. **Quick start spirit** - Keep explanations brief and focused on practical execution
    4. **Progressive detail** - Start with setup, then basic workflow, then advanced options
    5. **Clear prerequisites** - Ensure directory creation and dependencies are explicitly mentioned

    **Content Style Guidelines**

    6. **Command formatting** - Include descriptive comments in code blocks
    7. **Bold subheadings** - Use bold text rather than deeper heading levels for substeps
    8. **Copy-pastable commands** - Ensure commands work as written without modification
    9. **Environment variables** - Use consistent variables (DATADIR, WKDIR)
    10. **Expected outputs** - Show example outputs and file structures where appropriate

    **Terminology Consistency**

    - "CLI approach" vs "Python/Module approach" - Different ways to use StarryNight
    - "Pre-fabricated pipelines" vs "Dynamic pipeline generation" - Two pipeline generation methods
    - "Workflow" - The end-to-end image processing sequence
    - "Pipeline" - The CellProfiler processing definition
    - "LoadData files" - CSV files that tell CellProfiler which images to process
