docs/developer/guides/workflow-implementation-guide.md, before:

# Workflow Implementation Guide

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for implementing new workflows in StarryNight.

## Understanding Workflow Flexibility

StarryNight is designed with flexibility in mind, allowing researchers to create and modify workflows at different levels of complexity. Depending on your needs, you can:

### Simple Changes (No Code Required)

- **Change Algorithms Within Modules**: Replace one algorithm with another (e.g., switching from CellProfiler's "IdentifyPrimaryObject" to "RunCellPose" for segmentation)
- **Add Channels**: The system automatically handles additional channels through the experiment configuration
- **Update Channel Mappings**: Built-in support for nucleus, cell, and mito channel mapping to standardized internal names

### Moderate Changes (Configuration Only)

- **Experiment Configuration Updates**: Modify channel mappings, experiment parameters, and module inputs
- **Module Input/Output Connections**: Reconfigure how modules connect to each other
- **Pipeline Composition**: Change the order and arrangement of modules in a pipeline

### Advanced Changes (Code Required)

- **Add New Modules**: Create entirely new modules for custom processing steps
- **Extend Channel Mappings**: Add support for mapping beyond the built-in nucleus, cell, and mito channels
- **Resource Configuration**: Specify compute resources at the task level (work in progress)

## Reference Implementation

Throughout this guide, we'll reference the practical implementation found in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`, which is also explained in detail in the [Practical Integration](../../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) architecture document. This step-by-step implementation demonstrates the complete PCP Generic pipeline workflow with the following steps:

1. Generate inventory and index
2. Calculate illumination correction (CP)
3. Apply illumination and align (CP)
4. Segmentation check (CP)
5. Calculate illumination correction (SBS)
6. Apply illumination and align (SBS)
7. Preprocess (SBS)
8. Analysis

Each step follows a consistent three-phase pattern for CellProfiler integration:

- Generate load data (configuration data for CellProfiler)
- Generate pipeline file (CellProfiler pipeline definition)
- Execute the pipeline (running CellProfiler)

Rather than duplicating all the code examples here, we'll focus on explaining the key concepts and scenarios for implementing and modifying workflows, with references to the existing examples where appropriate.

## Key Workflow Components

Workflows in StarryNight are built from several key components that work together:

### Data Configuration
The `DataConfig` object defines paths for input data, storage, and workspace. It configures where the pipeline will look for input data and where it will store outputs and intermediate files. This configuration is used throughout the pipeline.

### Execution Backend
The execution backend (typically `SnakeMakeBackend`) handles running the pipeline. It translates module definitions into executable operations and manages their execution, including scheduling, parallelization, and resource allocation.

### Experiment Configuration
The experiment configuration contains metadata about your dataset and processing settings, including:

- Acquisition settings (order, frame type, overlap percentage)
- Channel mappings (which microscope channels correspond to nucleus, cell, and mitochondria)
- Other experiment-specific parameters

This configuration drives all subsequent module behavior without requiring repetitive parameter specification.

### Modules
Modules are the building blocks of workflows. Each module:

- Is configured via its `from_config()` method
- Produces a "pipe" that's executed by the backend
- Has defined inputs and outputs
- May require outputs from previous modules
- Is executed in a containerized environment

## Example Workflow Implementations

Looking at the reference implementation in `exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`, we can see both simple and complex workflows in action:

### Simple Workflow Pattern

The simplest workflow pattern involves:

1. Setting up basic configurations (data, execution, experiment)
2. Creating modules one by one using their `from_config()` methods
3. Executing each module in sequence, waiting for completion before continuing

Each module in the PCP Generic pipeline follows a three-phase pattern specific to CellProfiler integration:

1. Generate LoadData - Creates configuration data for CellProfiler
2. Generate Pipeline - Creates the CellProfiler pipeline definition
3. Execute Pipeline - Runs CellProfiler with the generated files

### Complex Workflow Pattern

For more complex workflows, StarryNight provides pipeline composition capabilities through the `create_pcp_generic_pipeline` function, which:

- Creates all modules in one place
- Composes them into a pipeline with parallel execution
- Enables complex execution patterns (parallel processing of independent steps)
- Provides a more concise implementation for production use

## Common Workflow Modification Scenarios

### Scenario 1: Change Algorithm Implementation

If you want to replace one algorithm with another (for example, switching from CellProfiler's `IdentifyPrimaryObject` to `RunCellPose` for segmentation):

#### Using a legacy pipeline with a different algorithm

  - Create your custom pipeline file with the new algorithm
  - Skip the pipeline generation step in the workflow
  - Pass your custom pipeline file directly to the invoke module

In the reference implementation, you would modify the segmentation step (Step 3: CP segcheck) by:

  - Running the LoadData generation (like in `exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py` line 295)
  - Skipping the CPPipe generation step (lines 312-323)
  - Creating your own custom pipeline file
  - Modifying the invoke step to use your custom pipeline (around line 329)

#### Modifying an automatically generated pipeline

   - Extend the appropriate CPPipe generation module
   - Override the pipeline template with your modified version
   - Use your extended module in the workflow

### Scenario 2: Add New Channel

Adding a new channel requires updating the experiment configuration in the `PCPGenericInitConfig` object (as seen around line 153 in the reference implementation):

1. Update the experiment configuration with the new channel mapping
2. The LoadData module will automatically handle the new channel when generating the LoadData CSV
3. When using automatically generated pipelines, they will adapt to include the new channel
4. If using legacy pipelines, ensure they are designed to handle the additional channel

The system is designed to flexibly adapt to different numbers of channels, and the changes are isolated to the experiment configuration.

### Scenario 3: Add/Remove/Reorder Modules

To change the arrangement of modules in a workflow:

1. **Adding a module**:

   - Import the new module class
   - Create an instance using its `from_config()` method
   - Connect its inputs to outputs from preceding modules
   - Add it to your pipeline composition

2. **Removing a module**:

   - Simply omit it from your pipeline composition
   - Ensure any dependent modules are either removed or reconfigured

3. **Reordering modules**:

   - Change the order in your pipeline composition
   - Update input/output connections to maintain data flow

4. **Creating modules with interconnected inputs/outputs**:

   - Access a module's outputs via its `outputs` dictionary
   - Pass these as parameters when configuring dependent modules
   - Example: `module_b = ModuleB.from_config(data_config, experiment, input_path=module_a.outputs["output_path"])`

The reference implementation demonstrates these patterns throughout, with each module being configured based on the outputs of previous modules, creating a connected workflow.

## Creating New Modules

To create a new module for your workflow:

```python
from starrynight.modules.base import StarrynightModule
from starrynight.modules.specs import SpecContainer, TypeInput, TypeOutput, TypeEnum
from starrynight.config import DataConfig
from starrynight.experiments import Experiment

class YourModuleClass(StarrynightModule):
    @staticmethod
    def uid() -> str:
        """Return module unique id."""
        return "your_module_unique_id"

    @staticmethod
    def _spec() -> SpecContainer:
        """Return module default spec."""
        return SpecContainer(
            inputs=[
                TypeInput(
                    name="input_path",
                    type=TypeEnum.files,
                    description="Path to input files",
                    optional=False,
                ),
            ],
            outputs=[
                TypeOutput(
                    name="output_path",
                    type=TypeEnum.files,
                    description="Path for output files",
                    optional=False,
                ),
            ],
        )

    @classmethod
    def from_config(cls, data_config: DataConfig, experiment: Experiment, spec=None):
        """Create module from configuration."""
        # Use default spec if none provided
        if spec is None:
            spec = cls._spec()

        # Update paths based on data config
        spec.update_paths(data_config)

        # Define the pipeline
        pipe = create_your_module_pipe(spec, data_config, experiment)

        # Create and return module instance
        return cls(spec, pipe, [])

# Register your module in the registry
# In starrynight/modules/registry.py:
MODULE_REGISTRY: dict[str, StarrynightModule] = {
    # Existing modules...
    YourModuleClass.uid(): YourModuleClass,
}
```

## Resource Configuration

Resource configuration for modules is in development. The approach uses a "unit of work" concept:

```python
# Future API for resource configuration (work in progress)
class YourModuleWithResources(StarrynightModule):
    # ... other methods ...

    @classmethod
    def from_config(cls, data_config: DataConfig, experiment: Experiment, spec=None):
        # ... setup code ...

        # Define the pipeline with resource requirements
        pipe = create_your_module_pipe(
            spec,
            data_config,
            experiment,
            resources={
                "cpu": 2,       # 2 CPU cores
                "memory": 4096,  # 4 GB RAM
                "gpu": 0,       # No GPU
            }
        )

        # ... rest of the method ...
```

The executor will use these resource hints to make scheduling decisions, but the end user doesn't need to manage resources directly.

## References

- **StarryNight Architecture**: For more detailed information on the layers and their interactions, see the [Architecture Overview](../../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md)
- **Practical Integration**: The [Practical Integration](../../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) document explains the `exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py` implementation in detail
- **Architecture Flow**: The [Architecture Flow in Action](../../architecture/09_architecture_flow_example.md) document shows how data flows through all architectural layers
- **Reference Implementation**: The complete step-by-step implementation in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`
- **Module Registry**: Central registry for modules in `starrynight/modules/registry.py`
- **Pipeline Composition**: Functions for creating complete pipelines in `starrynight/pipelines/`

Commit message:

docs(workflow): remove line number references from implementation guide
- Replace references to specific line numbers with descriptive section names
- Ensure documentation remains valid even if implementation file changes

docs/developer/guides/workflow-implementation-guide.md, after:

# Workflow Implementation Guide

This guide provides step-by-step instructions for implementing new workflows in StarryNight.

## Understanding Workflow Flexibility

StarryNight is designed with flexibility in mind, allowing researchers to create and modify workflows at different levels of complexity. Depending on your needs, you can:

### Simple Changes (No Code Required)

- **Change Algorithms Within Modules**: Replace one algorithm with another (e.g., switching from CellProfiler's "IdentifyPrimaryObject" to "RunCellPose" for segmentation)
- **Add Channels**: The system automatically handles additional channels through the experiment configuration
- **Update Channel Mappings**: Built-in support for nucleus, cell, and mito channel mapping to standardized internal names

### Moderate Changes (Configuration Only)

- **Experiment Configuration Updates**: Modify channel mappings, experiment parameters, and module inputs
- **Module Input/Output Connections**: Reconfigure how modules connect to each other
- **Pipeline Composition**: Change the order and arrangement of modules in a pipeline

### Advanced Changes (Code Required)

- **Add New Modules**: Create entirely new modules for custom processing steps
- **Extend Channel Mappings**: Add support for mapping beyond the built-in nucleus, cell, and mito channels
- **Resource Configuration**: Specify compute resources at the task level (work in progress)

## Reference Implementation

Throughout this guide, we'll reference the practical implementation found in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`, which is also explained in detail in the [Practical Integration](../../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) architecture document. This step-by-step implementation demonstrates the complete PCP Generic pipeline workflow with the following steps:

1. Generate inventory and index
2. Calculate illumination correction (CP)
3. Apply illumination and align (CP)
4. Segmentation check (CP)
5. Calculate illumination correction (SBS)
6. Apply illumination and align (SBS)
7. Preprocess (SBS)
8. Analysis

Each step follows a consistent three-phase pattern for CellProfiler integration:

- Generate load data (configuration data for CellProfiler)
- Generate pipeline file (CellProfiler pipeline definition)
- Execute the pipeline (running CellProfiler)

Rather than duplicating all the code examples here, we'll focus on explaining the key concepts and scenarios for implementing and modifying workflows, with references to the existing examples where appropriate.

## Key Workflow Components

Workflows in StarryNight are built from several key components that work together:

### Data Configuration
The `DataConfig` object defines paths for input data, storage, and workspace. It configures where the pipeline will look for input data and where it will store outputs and intermediate files. This configuration is used throughout the pipeline.

### Execution Backend
The execution backend (typically `SnakeMakeBackend`) handles running the pipeline. It translates module definitions into executable operations and manages their execution, including scheduling, parallelization, and resource allocation.

### Experiment Configuration
The experiment configuration contains metadata about your dataset and processing settings, including:

- Acquisition settings (order, frame type, overlap percentage)
- Channel mappings (which microscope channels correspond to nucleus, cell, and mitochondria)
- Other experiment-specific parameters

This configuration drives all subsequent module behavior without requiring repetitive parameter specification.

### Modules
Modules are the building blocks of workflows. Each module:

- Is configured via its `from_config()` method
- Produces a "pipe" that's executed by the backend
- Has defined inputs and outputs
- May require outputs from previous modules
- Is executed in a containerized environment

## Example Workflow Implementations

Looking at the reference implementation in `exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`, we can see both simple and complex workflows in action:

### Simple Workflow Pattern

The simplest workflow pattern involves:

1. Setting up basic configurations (data, execution, experiment)
2. Creating modules one by one using their `from_config()` methods
3. Executing each module in sequence, waiting for completion before continuing

Each module in the PCP Generic pipeline follows a three-phase pattern specific to CellProfiler integration:

1. Generate LoadData - Creates configuration data for CellProfiler
2. Generate Pipeline - Creates the CellProfiler pipeline definition
3. Execute Pipeline - Runs CellProfiler with the generated files

### Complex Workflow Pattern

For more complex workflows, StarryNight provides pipeline composition capabilities through the `create_pcp_generic_pipeline` function, which:

- Creates all modules in one place
- Composes them into a pipeline with parallel execution
- Enables complex execution patterns (parallel processing of independent steps)
- Provides a more concise implementation for production use

## Common Workflow Modification Scenarios

### Scenario 1: Change Algorithm Implementation

If you want to replace one algorithm with another (for example, switching from CellProfiler's `IdentifyPrimaryObject` to `RunCellPose` for segmentation):

#### Using a legacy pipeline with a different algorithm

  - Create your custom pipeline file with the new algorithm
  - Skip the pipeline generation step in the workflow
  - Pass your custom pipeline file directly to the invoke module

In the reference implementation, you would modify the segmentation step (Step 3: CP segcheck) by:

  - Running the LoadData generation phase for CP segcheck
  - Skipping the CPPipe generation phase
  - Creating your own custom pipeline file
  - Modifying the invoke phase to use your custom pipeline

#### Modifying an automatically generated pipeline

   - Extend the appropriate CPPipe generation module
   - Override the pipeline template with your modified version
   - Use your extended module in the workflow

### Scenario 2: Add New Channel

Adding a new channel requires updating the experiment configuration in the `PCPGenericInitConfig` object in the experiment configuration section of the reference implementation:

1. Update the experiment configuration with the new channel mapping
2. The LoadData module will automatically handle the new channel when generating the LoadData CSV
3. When using automatically generated pipelines, they will adapt to include the new channel
4. If using legacy pipelines, ensure they are designed to handle the additional channel

The system is designed to flexibly adapt to different numbers of channels, and the changes are isolated to the experiment configuration.

### Scenario 3: Add/Remove/Reorder Modules

To change the arrangement of modules in a workflow:

1. **Adding a module**:

   - Import the new module class
   - Create an instance using its `from_config()` method
   - Connect its inputs to outputs from preceding modules
   - Add it to your pipeline composition

2. **Removing a module**:

   - Simply omit it from your pipeline composition
   - Ensure any dependent modules are either removed or reconfigured

3. **Reordering modules**:

   - Change the order in your pipeline composition
   - Update input/output connections to maintain data flow

4. **Creating modules with interconnected inputs/outputs**:

   - Access a module's outputs via its `outputs` dictionary
   - Pass these as parameters when configuring dependent modules
   - Example: `module_b = ModuleB.from_config(data_config, experiment, input_path=module_a.outputs["output_path"])`

The reference implementation demonstrates these patterns throughout, with each module being configured based on the outputs of previous modules, creating a connected workflow.

## Creating New Modules

To create a new module for your workflow:

```python
from starrynight.modules.base import StarrynightModule
from starrynight.modules.specs import SpecContainer, TypeInput, TypeOutput, TypeEnum
from starrynight.config import DataConfig
from starrynight.experiments import Experiment

class YourModuleClass(StarrynightModule):
    @staticmethod
    def uid() -> str:
        """Return module unique id."""
        return "your_module_unique_id"

    @staticmethod
    def _spec() -> SpecContainer:
        """Return module default spec."""
        return SpecContainer(
            inputs=[
                TypeInput(
                    name="input_path",
                    type=TypeEnum.files,
                    description="Path to input files",
                    optional=False,
                ),
            ],
            outputs=[
                TypeOutput(
                    name="output_path",
                    type=TypeEnum.files,
                    description="Path for output files",
                    optional=False,
                ),
            ],
        )

    @classmethod
    def from_config(cls, data_config: DataConfig, experiment: Experiment, spec=None):
        """Create module from configuration."""
        # Use default spec if none provided
        if spec is None:
            spec = cls._spec()

        # Update paths based on data config
        spec.update_paths(data_config)

        # Define the pipeline
        pipe = create_your_module_pipe(spec, data_config, experiment)

        # Create and return module instance
        return cls(spec, pipe, [])

# Register your module in the registry
# In starrynight/modules/registry.py:
MODULE_REGISTRY: dict[str, StarrynightModule] = {
    # Existing modules...
    YourModuleClass.uid(): YourModuleClass,
}
```

## Resource Configuration

Resource configuration for modules is in development. The approach uses a "unit of work" concept:

```python
# Future API for resource configuration (work in progress)
class YourModuleWithResources(StarrynightModule):
    # ... other methods ...

    @classmethod
    def from_config(cls, data_config: DataConfig, experiment: Experiment, spec=None):
        # ... setup code ...

        # Define the pipeline with resource requirements
        pipe = create_your_module_pipe(
            spec,
            data_config,
            experiment,
            resources={
                "cpu": 2,       # 2 CPU cores
                "memory": 4096,  # 4 GB RAM
                "gpu": 0,       # No GPU
            }
        )

        # ... rest of the method ...
```

The executor will use these resource hints to make scheduling decisions, but the end user doesn't need to manage resources directly.

## References

- **StarryNight Architecture**: For more detailed information on the layers and their interactions, see the [Architecture Overview](../../architecture/00_architecture_overview.md)
- **Practical Integration**: The [Practical Integration](../../architecture/08_practical_integration.md) document explains the `exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py` implementation in detail
- **Architecture Flow**: The [Architecture Flow in Action](../../architecture/09_architecture_flow_example.md) document shows how data flows through all architectural layers
- **Reference Implementation**: The complete step-by-step implementation in `starrynight/notebooks/pypct/exec_pcp_generic_pipe.py`
- **Module Registry**: Central registry for modules in `starrynight/modules/registry.py`
- **Pipeline Composition**: Functions for creating complete pipelines in `starrynight/pipelines/`
